feat(main): experimental.tsconfig (#11832)
withastro/astro: .changeset/empty-fans-reflect.md

This option removes the need for a separate `src/env.d.ts` file to provide Vite's client types to your project. Instead, `/.astro/tsconfig.json` will be autogenerated with linked types for you. Notably, this fixes an existing issue with `astro check` false positives by excluding your build from your checked files by default.

To enable this option in an existing project, you will need to update your `tsconfig.json` to reference the new file. You may also need to update your `astro.config.mjs` as some items have now moved to Astro configuration options.

Your `tsconfig.json` file must now extend the new `/.astro/` file:

```diff
{
    "extends": [
        "astro/tsconfigs/base", 
+        "./.astro/tsconfig.json"
    ]
}
```

If you have `include` or `exclude` inside your root `tsconfig.json`, move them to your Astro config:

```diff
{
-    "include": ["src/**/*"],
-    "exclude": ["node_modules"]
}
```

```diff
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config'

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
+        tsconfig: {
+            include: ['src/**/*'],
+            exclude: ['node_modules']
+        }
    }
})
```

> It will create references under the hood, making `env.d.ts` optional if you haven't made any change to it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will create references under the hood, making `env.d.ts` only necessary if you have added / for... :
```
Can you phrase it this way? What is this file still required for?

Author: Updated, not 100% about what to put. @Princesseuh wdyt?

Reviewer 2: Sarah's suggestion is good for me!

Reviewer: Good by me for docs! Sounds legit. :joy: Erika can say if it's the correct thing to say.

> It will create references under the hood, making `env.d.ts` only necessary if you have added custom type declarations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will create references under the hood, making `env.d.ts` necessary only if you have added custom type declarations:
```
nit!

```diff
-/// <reference types="astro/client" />
-/// <reference path="../.astro/types.d.ts" />
```

> To learn more, check out the [documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/configuration-reference/#experimentaltypescript).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more, check out the [`experimental.tsconfig` documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/configuration-reference/#experimentaltypescript).
```

---
'astro': minor
---

> Adds a new `experimental.typescript` configuration option

Reviewer: Just noting before I get into a full review that this name is pretty generic, and can make it look like *TypeScript* is experimental in Astro. :joy:

Usually these names are specific to what they do. If this is to provide more fine-grained TS config options, maybe even `experimental.tsconfig` which makes it super clear that this is a new way to "handle" these options!

Author: Good point! This is inspired by nuxt which have a `typescript` option but it makes more stuff so yeah I think `experimental.tsconfig` makes sense. I'll update

Author: Done!

If you enable this option, Astro will generate a `tsconfig.json` file under `./.astro/`:

```diff
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
+    experimental: {
+        typescript: {}
+    }
})
```

It will create references under the hood, making `env.d.ts` optional if you haven't made any change to it:

```diff
-/// <reference types="astro/client" />
-/// <reference path="../.astro/types.d.ts" />
```

> Enabling this option will require a few updates to your root `tsconfig.json`:
> 
> 1. You'll need to make sure `extends` points to `./.astro/tsconfig.json`. If it's not correctly set, an eror will be thrown with a diff to help you
> 2. If you have `include` or `exclude`, you'll have to move them to respectively `experimental.typescript.include` and `experimental.typescript.exclude`:
> 
> ```diff
> {
> -    "include": ["foo"],
> -    "exclude": ["bar"]
> }
> ```
> 
> ```diff
> import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"
> 
> export default defineConfig({
>     experimental: {
>         typescript: {
> +            include: ["foo"],
> +            exclude: ["bar"]
>         }
>     }
> })
> ```

Reviewer 3: There is a small typo on `error` (`eror` > `error`) that needs to be fixed. Other than that, I'm not Sarah 😁 but I think this should a little reworded to be more direct and more precise (the two diff blocks):
````suggestion
Enabling this option will require a few updates to your root `tsconfig.json`:

1. `extends` must point to `./.astro/tsconfig.json` otherwise an error will be thrown with a diff to help you.
2. If set, move `include` and `exclude` to `experimental.typescript.include` and `experimental.typescript.exclude` respectively in your Astro config file.

For example, in `tsconfig.json` you'll need to make the following changes:

```diff
{
+    "extends": "./.astro/tsconfig.json"
-    "include": ["foo"],
-    "exclude": ["bar"]
}
```

Then you'll need to reflect them in `astro.config.mjs`:

```diff
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        typescript: {
+            include: ["foo"],
+            exclude: ["bar"]
        }
    }
})
```
````

I'm not sure about the ``in `astro.config.mjs`:`` since we can have different extensions (e.g. `.ts`) but this will help the user to understand where these diff take place.

But again, I'm not Sarah or Chris... so maybe you'll have better suggestions. 😄

---
'astro': minor
---

> Adds a new `experimental.tsconfig` configuration option

Reviewer: Note from me that Florian will now grab content from the finalized API documentation to refine the changeset! :raised_hands: 

I'm out until I'm summoned again to look at this!

```diff
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
+    experimental: {
+        tsconfig: {}
+    }
})
```

It will create references under the hood, making `env.d.ts` optional if you haven't made any change to it:

```diff
-/// <reference types="astro/client" />
-/// <reference path="../.astro/types.d.ts" />
```

Enabling this option will require a few updates to your root `tsconfig.json`:

1. `extends` must point to `./.astro/tsconfig.json` otherwise an error will be thrown with a diff to help you.
2. If set, move `include` and `exclude` to `experimental.tsconfig.include` and `experimental.tsconfig.exclude` respectively in your Astro config file.

For example, in `tsconfig.json` you'll need to make the following changes:

```diff
{
+    "extends": "./.astro/tsconfig.json"
-    "include": ["foo"],
-    "exclude": ["bar"]
}
```

Then you'll need to reflect them in `astro.config.mjs`:

```diff
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        tsconfig: {
+            include: ["foo"],
+            exclude: ["bar"]
        }
    }
})
```

> By default, `outDir` will now be excluded to avoid a long standing issue when using `astro check` on an already built project. If you want to opt-out of this behavior, you can set `experimental.typescript.excludeOutDir` to `false`:

Reviewer 4: Is there a discussion about needing `excludeOutDir`? I think we should be strict here and not introduce that option. It's unlikely that a user wants to not exclude the out dir I think

Author: I don't remember exactly where/when it occurred but @Princesseuh told me some people actually want to check their build folder for some reason, although it's rare

Reviewer 2: Yea, some people once wanted it, I think it could be excluded and those people wouldn't necessarily lose sleep over it, though. We can reconsider if someone else ask

```diff
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {

>         typescript: {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        tsconfig: {
```

Reviewer: Thanks Bjorn! I haven't even *got* to the changeset until the API docs are finalized :smile:
